# Gap Test

See REFERENCES for information about the Gap Test.

The tests in this repository are applied against a variety
of random number generators, some weak and some strong.
The purpose of this repository is to show how the gap test
is calculated, and what types of generators pass the test
with a p-value between 0.01 and 0.99.

Random number generators used in this test.

eegl64

The eegl64 random number generator is explained in the repository
"eegl64".  That is a random number generator based on a 64 bit
LFSR with a Bays Durham shuffle.  The period length of the eegl64
generator approximates 1.2 * 10^61036 generations.  That is a long
period length, that never terminates, or wraps around.  The eegl64
generator passes this test.

----------------

etaus

The eetaus random number generator is explained in the repository
"etaus".  That is a random number generator based on the Tausworthe
algorithm by Pierre L'Ecuyer at the University of Montreal.
Etaus uses the Bays-Durham shuffle.  The period length of this
generator approximates 1.2 * 10^61036 generations.  That is a
long period length, that never terminates, or wraps around.  The
etaus generator passes this test.

----------------

Fibonacci

The fibonacci random number generator illustrates how a weak
random number generator fails this test.

fibonum1 = fibonum2
fibonum2 = fibonum3
fibonum3 = fibonum1 + fibonum2
fraction = fibonum3 / maxint

fraction is a pseudo random number with a uniform distribution
ranging from zero to one.

----------------

LFSR

The LFSR random number generator illustrates how a weak
random number generator fails this test.

See the macro MYLFSR at the beginning of the program for the
algorithm used in the LFSR generator.  The LFSR generator used
is a 64 bit linear feedback shift register with a period length
of 2^64.

MYLFSR;
fraction = lfsr / maxint

fraction is a pseudo random number with a uniform distribution
ranging from zero to one.

----------------

RANDU

The RANDU random number generator illustrates how a weak
random number generator fails this test.

RANDU is a 32 bit generator with a period length of 2^30.

seed *= 65539;
fraction = seed / maxint

fraction is a pseudo random number with a uniform distribution
ranging from zero to one.

----------------

Sine Wave Generator

The sine random number generator illustrates how a weak
random number generator fails this test.

/* generate a uniform number between zero and PI */
theta = eeglunif(ee) * M_PI;
sinx = sin(theta);

sinx is a pseudo random number with a sine distribution
ranging from zero to one.

----------------

GNU Scientific Library Generators

The GSL generators illustrate how a variety of strong random
number generators perform well in this test.

fraction = gsl_rng_uniform(rng);

fraction is a strong random number with a uniform distribution
ranging from zero to one.

The following generators failed the gap test.

random32-bsd

random32-glibc2

random32-libc5

----------------

Dieharder generators

The dieharder package contains 74 well known random number
generators.  Dieharder can generate 32 bit unsigned integers
from these generators with the following command.

dieharder -g nnn -t yyy -o

where nnn is the three digit number of the generator, and
yyy is the number of integers to generate.

For example,

dieharder -g 053 -t 1000 -o

This example generates one thousand 32 bit integers using
the taus2 generator.  053 is the number of the taus2 generator.

To see all the generator numbers, run the following command.

dieharder -g -l

The gap test command for dieharder generators in this repository
is called tstdie.sh.  The parameter for this command is the
dieharder generator number.  For example,

tstdie.sh 053

This runs the test using the taus2 generator from dieharder.

The following dieharder generators fail this test.

random32-glibc2

uni

-----------------------------------------------------------

The following subroutines are used in the gap test.

bld_maxint.c - for dieharder generators, build a table of maximum
integers unique to each generator.

bld_rngtbl.c - for dieharder, maintain a table of generator names
associated with each generator number.

calcchi.c - Calculate the chi square test..

diepfx.c - bypass the header in the output file from dieharder.

getdie.c - read one uniform random number generated by dieharder.

Eegl64 subroutines.

eeglabt.c - print copyright and a summary of the GNU Public License.

eeglbit.c - output a random bit

eegl.c - core randomizer, outputs a 32 bit unsigned integer.

eeglcrc.c - calculate the crc for the initial seed.

eegldspl.c - display the internal state of the generator.

eeglfrac.c - generate a 53 bit fraction between zero and one.

eeglinit.c - initialize the generator based on date, time, and
number of ticks since the machine was booted.

eeglint.c - generate a random integer between zero and a limit
minus one.

eeglpwr.c - generate from 1 to 32 random bits.

eeglsd.c - generate a random seed based on a crc calculation.

eeglstrt.c - initialize the generator based on three seed parameters.

eeglunif.c - generate a 32 bit fraction between zero and one.

Etaus generator.  Each subroutine corresponds to the eegl64
subroutine, above, with the same name and features.

etausabt.c

etausbit.c

etaus.c

etausdspl.c

etausfrac.c

etausinit.c

etausint.c

etauspwr.c

etausstrt.c

etausunif.c

--------------------------------------------------------------

If you have a random number generator that you want to include
in this repository, you are welcome to submit your generator for
inclusion.

Read the INSTALL and TESTING documents for more information
about how to use this repository.  Read REFERENCES for information
about the gap test.

